>> Brian Holt: Next thing
we're going to do is,
we're going to make, we're going
to get into talking about loops.
So let's say, I want to,
I have this variable called let
friendsAtYourParty, and initially,
since no one has showed up to your party,
that number's going to be zero.
>> Brian Holt: But over time,
your friends start showing up, so
you are gonna say friendsAtYourParty
equals friendsAtYourParty plus one.
>> Brian Holt: So
this might be a little bit confusing,
defining friends in your
party in terms of itself.
But you can think of it this way,
that it is taking the previous value
of friendsAtYourParty, adding 1 to it,
and reassigning friendsAtYourParty
to be that, right?
So in this particular case,
friendsAtYourParty was zero, okay?
So this is, you can think of it as 0+1.
And now friendsAtYourParty, I just
set console.log(friendsAtYourParty),
and refresh here, it's gonna be 1, right.
That make sense?
Cuz you’re taking friendsAtYourParty,
0, plus 1 and
you are reassigning that
to friendsAtYourParty.
So in other words, the right side
of the equal signs happens first.
>> Brian Holt: So,
it does the math here, and
it takes whatever that result of that is,
and assigns that to friendsAtYourParty.
>> Brian Holt: Okay?
What happens if I copy and
paste this and do it again?
>> Brian Holt: Now what's
friendsAtYourParty gonna be?
>> Speaker 2: Be two?
>> Brian Holt: It's going to be two.
You can see there.
What happens if we do this and
I do it a bunch of times?
>> Speaker 2: Adding one every time.
>> Brian Holt: This is great programming,
right here.
You should program exactly like this.
>> Brian Holt: Five, six, seven, eight,
nine, let's go for around ten, okay.
So,
>> Brian Holt: this is obviously great
idea and I'm the best programmer ever.
>> Brian Holt: Wouldn't it be better
if there was an easier way to do this?
>> Brian Holt: There is, okay?
[LAUGH]
>> Group: [LAUGH]
>> Brian Holt: Spoiler alert.
There is.
So let's show you a way to do that.
So I'm gonna show you
what's called a loop.
So I'm gonna say while
friendsAtYourParty is less than 10,
this works exactly like an if statement,
right?
So instead of having if here, I'm going
to say while, and basically say like keep
executing what is ever between these
curly braces until this becomes true.
So while this is false, do this over and
over and over again until it's true.
>> Brian Holt: So
I'm gonna say friendsAtYourParty
equal friendsAtYourParty+1.
Console.log, friendsAtYourParty,
I already had that.
>> Brian Holt: So what I had before and
what I have now, functionally,
it works exactly the same.
So those 10 lines of adding
one to friendsAtYourParty,
functionally, this works
exactly the same way.
In fact, if we say this and refresh it,
you can see here, it's still 10.
So, while this is false,
it's going to keep doing that.
And eventually, friendsAtYourParty
is going to be greater than 10.
And then, it's not going to execute again.
>> Brian Holt: To kind of drive that home,
I'm just gonna put a console log in here,
of friendsAtYourParty.
What's this going to do?
>> Speaker 4: Keep stating
each number until is done.
>> Brian Holt: That's exactly right.
So it starts at zero, right?
It makes sense.
Then it's going to do its first iteration.
Which is why we get zero,
it's going to run this line and
it's gonna go back up here and
ask the question again.
Hey, is friends at your party,
is one less than ten?
Or is one greater than ten?
It's gonna say no, it's not,
cool, I'm gonna run it again.
Runs it again, logs it out here,
so you get one here,
adds one to friends at
your party plus one.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, comes back up here,
and says, hey, is 2 greater than 10?
Nope, and so it keeps doing that over and
over and over again.
And it's gonna say, is 10 less than 10?
And it's not, right?
Because 10 is equal to 10, right?
And at that point, it says cool, I'm done
with this loop, knocks you out of it, and
you continue on your merry way.
So this is the first of a couple different
kinds of loops I'm going to show you
how to do.
>> Brian Holt: I mean,
these are hard concepts, right,
they're a bit mind-bending that you're
thinking about re-executing the same
lines of code.
But think about, how many times do
you think line four gets executed?
It gets executed 10 times, right.
And that's because it's going through
this wild loop until it eventually
breaks out of it.
Now, for fun, let's crash the browser,
because that's always fun to do.
Let's just say that I forgot
to put the plus one here.
Do not do this,
because it's going to crash my browser.
Okay, so if I say here,
while friendsAtYourParty equals
friendsAtYourParty, so it's just
going to keep reassigning itself.
When will this ever be true?
It will never be true, so
I'm going to refresh my browser.
Can you see how many
times this is executing?
>> Brian Holt: It's just
going to keep going.
So this, as you might imagine,
is called an infinite loop.
It's never gonna stop.
I'm gonna have to kill the tab.
>> Brian Holt: This is why Apple's
on one Infinite Loop, right?
That's the joke there.
Okay.
>> Speaker 5: What happens if it gets up
to that maximum integer, nine quadrillion,
does that have anything to do with?
>> Brian Holt: Eventually Firefox is
going to say, something's up here, and
it's gonna it's going to
give you like the sick tab,
like, this tab is not being responsive.
I don't know what the heuristic
is to decide when that is, but
at some point it says,
you're probably pretty bad at programming.
[LAUGH]
>> Brian Holt: So let's kill that tab.
>> Brian Holt: Gosh, gotta change it
first, or it's gonna do it again.
Good job, Brian.
>> Brian Holt: So if you ever see your
computer just like lock up like that and
become like pretty much
totally unresponsive,
it's a pretty good culprit that you
might have done an infinite loop.
>> Brian Holt: In fact, I'm going to show
you on CodePen how to mitigate that,
because someone's going to do it.
Okay, so, now everything looks good.
Don't do infinite loops.
It's bad.